Protein Mass Fingerprinting

One of the main issues of proteomics is the identification of proteins based on mass 
spectrometric data. The bioinformatics group develops new and improved algorithms in 
the field of peptide mass fingerprinting in close collaboration with the Edison 
Biotechnology Institute. Proteins represent functional molecules of cells and proteomic 
information can be used to determine their impact on biological conditions such as 
differentiation, development or disease. Peptide Mass Fingerprinting and the detection 
of modifications in the identified proteins can provide insight into the biochemical 
basis for the development diseases. The multitude of modifications such as oxidation, 
phosphorylation makes the detailed identification of proteins a non-trivial problem. 
With the analysis and early detection of proteins associated with the development of 
diseases such as diabetes, the discovery of diagnostics and therapeutics is feasible. 

Functional proteomics research in general and drug discovery in particular, form one 
of the main foundations of the current molecular biology research. This project analyzes 
the functional proteomics research process and provides a requirement analysis for the 
integrated protein identification process. Protein Identification is responsible for 
the recognition of proteins that are involved in a metabolic pathway of a function. 
A detailed analysis of the necessary input and output data for a protein identification 
software tool is provided to construct the basis of the design and implementation of a 
functional proteomics software platform. The final software tool features a graphical 
user interface that allows the manipulation of input and output files and the specified 
parameters by simple point and click procedures. Timely checks of the Protein 
Identification results are to automated as well as the prediction of post-translational 
modifications of the analyzed peptides. The currently time and man power intensive 
protein identification process will be converted into a simple automated on-click 
analysis.

Proteomics Experiment

	Experiment	

	In the the experimentation phase of a project a group of specimen is separated into a
	control group and a treatment group. For the Type-2 Diabetes research the treatment 
	group is treated with a high fat diet to induce diabetes. Every two weeks the specimen 
	are being measured. These measurements are conducted on a statistically signi¯cant 
	number of specimen ¯rst determining the morphological speci¯cation. After this step
	the specimen are being killed and the organs are removed. The organs are homogenized
	into a tissue soup and then separated again through centrifuging. After protein 
	concentration is measured, the centrifuged separation will be reduced and alkylated. 
	The alkylated tissue can then be analyzed using electrophoretic gels. The proteins of
	the specimen tissue will be separated according to weight and its isoelectric point 
	using a 2D SDS PAGE Analysis.

	Image Analysis

	In the image analysis a digital image is captured from the 2D Gel using a digital 
	camera or a scanner. The captured imaged is cropped and resized to match previously
	captured images of different specimen. The gamma rate of the picture is adjusted to 
	allow for a better differentiation of protein spots in the image. The preprocessed 
	image is then compared to images of specimen take at different time points. These 
	comparison allows the creation of a quanti¯cation of intensity di®erence of the 
	shown proteins. With the intensity difference vector an intelligent selection of 
	diabetes related proteins can be achieved. The selected spots are cut out of the 2D
	Gel and a Mass Spectrometry is conducted on them. Various software tools have
	been developed to handle this problem like BIORAD's PDQuest, Melanie III, Image 
	Master and Progenesis. Since the current tools can not identify interesting spots
	satisfactorily various improvements have been suggested in the literature.

	Protein Identification

	In the Protein Identifcation stage the selected spots are subjected to a Mass 
	Spectrometry and a Tandem Mass Spectrometry. These two analysis processes produce 
	various data files, among them Peak Lists, which provide information about the masses
	and intensity of the analyzed proteins and peptides. Using computational algorithms 
	these peak lists are analyzed and the subjected proteins and their post-translational
	modifcations are identifed.

	In the protein analysis the sequence of the identifed protein is determined and human 
	homologues are inquired. The human homologue inquiry is based on simple BLAST searches
	and lead, upon identifcation of a homologue, to a checking of the previous existence 
	in the metabolic pathway of Type-2 Diabetes or in case of non-existence of a homologue
	to the discarding of the protein or the publication depending on the extend of the 
	species Type-2 Diabetes research. If the identifed protein is previously unknown the 
	protein sequence has to be determined by additional mass spectrometric experiments. The
	derived sequence will be published and further analyzed for the homology to human proteins.

	Pathway Analysis

	After deriving the homologue protein for the human species the existence in the Type-2 
	Diabetes related pathways will be determined. If the protein is existent in the diabetes
	pathways the newly discovered connections will be linked into the pathway to extend the 
	information content. If the protein is not existent yet, a new pathway will be created, 
	which then will be linked to the existent pathways to extent the diabetes pathway knowledge.

A peak list

Mass Spectrometry is used to measure the masses of proteolytic peptide fragments. The 
tryptic digestion of a protein during the Mass Spectrometry yields a specific number 
of peptides of specific length, sequence and mass. This list of peptides becomes a 
valuable reference tool know as a peak list. The peptides in a peaklist can be ranked 
from lowest mass to highest mass revealing unique masses for peptides over six amino acids
in length, which translates to about 700 Da. Up to 10,000 peaks can be stored in a peak 
list with an overall mass limit of 16kDa or 255 residues.

The Mass Spectrometry Analysis produces peak lists containing three columns. The first 
column marks the mass/charge ratio the so called m/z value directly measured by the mass
analyzer of the Mass Spectrometer. The second column describes the intensity of a peak. 
Although the mass values of the peaks are the most important information in determining 
the identity of a protein, the intensity values assist in this process by normalizing 
the peak information. As a function of the peptide's basicity, length and several other 
physical and chemical parameters determined during the Mass Spectrometry, their main use 
is to distinguish an actual signal from noise. The third and last column provides 
information about the charge provided in the mass analysis. This allows the calculation 
of the actual mass from the measured mass/charge value.

A Mass Spectrometry peak list format contains a simple set of embedded parameters. They 
over-ride entries in the corresponding form ¯elds of Peptide Mass Fingerprinting (Protein 
Identification) tools. Next to embedded parameters a Mass Spectrometry can only contain 
mass and intensity value entries. Tandem Mass Spectrometry peak lists can hold much more 
additional information. Sequence queries and specific MS/MS data sets are stored as unique 
parameters. Different Tandem Mass Spectrometry peak lists can contain different header 
information depending on their format. The Mascot Generic Format is the preferred peak 
list format for conducting Peptide Mass Fingerprinting with the Matrixscience tool Mascot.

Software Solution

The current status of the Protein Mass Fingerprinting at Ohio University is based on the 
submission of one peak list at a time to web sites and a time consuming manual analysis 
of the produced data. The results induced from the received data will then be analyzed 
by the submission of the according fragment peak lists to Tandem Mass Spectrometry web 
sites. The analyzed data is once more analyzed by hand. After the verification, multiple 
post-translational modifications have to be tested in case the matched proteins score
was not perfect. This analysis has to be conducted by hand as well, and includes the 
Mass Spectrometry as well as verifying Tandem Mass Spectrometry.

To tackle this problem the protein mass fingerprinting software takes a peak list file
and submits it to Protein Prospector's implementation of the MS-Fit algorithm. A link to 
a locally stored html page containing the results is provided to the user. The user can 
control which files to submit (batch mode) and the number of predicted proteins returned.
Furthermore it is possible to restrict searches based on the mass type and the species.

PMF user configurable parameters
    
    1. MS Input: Enter a file specification for the peaklist file which you would
                 like to process. Or press the associated button to browse to a
                 single file. Once a single file is found you can modify the filespec
                 by adding DOS wildcards (like *.*) to the file specification, to
                 include more than one file.
    2. Output directory: Enter a file specification for the directory where the output
                 files are to go. Or press the associated button to select a directory
                 by browsing.
    3. Taxonomy: Press the button and select the species you would like to search for
                 matching proteins.
    4. Mass: The choices are 1) Monoisotopic: only the lowest common isotope for each
                                              element is used in the mass calculations
                                              12C, 1H, 14N, 16O, 32S, 31P.
                             2) Average:      All isotopes for each element are used and
                                              with their abundances reflecting their
                                              ”normal” proportion in the biosphere.
    5. Number of hits: specify the maximum number of hits that you would like to have
                       returned by the search.
    6. Overwrite: Checking the overwrite option means that the search will always be done,
                  even if the results of a previous search already exist on the local
                  drive. De-selecting this option allows you to do a search run with a
                  lot of files and only re-search the files that did not return results
                  on the previous run.
    7. MS Fit checkbox: Check this box if you actually want to do the PMF search using
                        the MS Fit website. This is the only option currently available
                        by design. The plan is, that in the future there will be several
                        options for doing a PMF search.
  
    The Run and Cancel buttons
    
    When you have selected all the parameters you want, press the run button to start the
    PMF search. Links to the results files will appear in the right hand side whenever
    they become available. You may press the cancel button at any time to stop the PMF
    search task.

    The right-hand display area

    Results of the PMF search task will be displayed in the right hand pane of the main
    window. Links to HTML display files will show up in red. Clicking on a link will open
    the results file using the Web browser on your system.